Hi, and welcome back.
In this video we're going to talk
about queues and stacks again,
and we're also going to introduce a new concept,
that is very popular in programming
but can sometimes cause a bit of confusion.
Let's recap queues and stacks first.
You remember this diagram from before,
and how in a queue, you add new elements at the end,
and when you remove an element,
it always gets removed from the start.
This is just a queue, like a queue
for the supermarket, for example.
And a queue in Python, we can implement
using lists or using the Deque module
or the Queue module, as we've seen before.
Here's a simple sample implementing a queue using lists.
Here we've got our class queue.
When you create a new object, it sets
self.items to be an empty list,
and then you can push and pop.
Push and pop are two names that are frequently used
in the context of queues and stacks,
just, I'm not really sure why these names are exactly used,
but you can think of it, as, you know, adding a
new element and removing an element.
And, depending on whether you are working with a
queue or a stack, the adding or the removal
is going to happen in a different place.
Here, when we push in a queue, we append an item,
so we add the new item at the end of the queue,
and when we pop, what we do, is we create a temporary
variable called head and set it to be self items
zero and then we set self.items to be
self.items starting from the value one.
And then we return to head.
This is not a very reliable solution, by the way.
What happens if you only have one item, say?
But, I just wanted to illustrate how a queue might work
if you were to implement it yourself.
Just append at the end and remove from the start.
And, this is sort of how you'd use it.
You create a new queue object,
and you can push values to it.
Let's push five, seven, and 11,
and then you can print the result of popping
and that is gonna, sort of, print out five, at first,
and then it's going to leave seven
and 11 remaining in the queue.
You can pop again, and that's gonna pop,
sort of remove the next item from the list and print it out,
and leave your list with only 11.
With a stack, it's slightly different.
This is a stack and you can remove elements from the top
and when you add another one it goes back on the top.
So, the oldest elements are always at the bottom,
and newer elements are at the top.
And again, implementing this in Python,
you have here your class stack which again defines
self.items to be an empty list.
When you push, you push at the start of the list.
So we are saying that self.items
now is a list of only the new element,
which is a parameter plus self.items.
So that's going to join the two lists together.
You can end up essentially adding an element
at the start and pop is going to do self.items.pop
and you can see lists allow us to pop
and that just sort of removes the last element from the
list and gives it back to you,
so the stack pop and the list pop really do the same thing.
And again, now you can push, but notice how when you
push five, you get a list of only five,
and when you push seven, the seven goes in front.
And then you push 11, the 11 goes in front,
and as you pop you start removing from the front as well.
So you are adding and removing from the same place.
We've already seen queues and stacks.
I just wanted to give you a little bit of code
about how they work because what we're going to
talk about next is something that I find really interesting.
And, that is, the concept of how many steps does it take
to find an element in a queue or a stack or a list.
Let me go through it and I'm sure you'll understand
where I'm coming from.
We can say that these queues and stacks and lists
and many other data structures as well
are what we call sequential.
You start looking for elements at one end
and you go through until the other end.
So if you are with a queue, you start at the
first element and you move on to the second one,
the third one, and so forth until you reach
the very last element.
This means that if you are looking for an element
in the middle, you have to go through
all the elements along the way.
So, it can be really useful to start looking
at one end and then go through each element
until you reach the last one.
But it can also be quite slow.
Let's say you wanted to only get the last element,
you can't really do that with a queue unless you first
pop all the elements that came before it.
Here's another example, let's say you
have a long list, a very long one, and you're
looking for a specific element.
For example, this list here.
Let's say we're looking of the element 90.
Well, as you can see, we had to do a bunch of jumps.
We've gone from 13 to 56, 38, and so forth
until we reached the element number 90.
This is because a list is sequential.
If you're looking for an element, the only
thing you can do really is start at the beginning
or maybe you can start at the end,
if that's more suitable.
But, either way you have to start at one end,
and go through each element
until you find the one you want.
So this can be quite slow.
It could be nicer if, you know, we could just
know where the element is.
But, of course with a list, you can't really do that.
The number of steps we've had to do is quite a few.
Our list here has 21 elements.
You don't have to count them.
Just believe me here.
So, let's say that an arbitrary variable n is 21.
If we wanted to find the very last element in this list,
we could go from the start through each element
until we reach the last one.
So we have to perform 21 sort of jumps.
We have to sort of jump into the first element,
jump into the second element,
and jump into the third element, and so forth.
That means that for a list, which is a sequential structure,
finding an element can take us up to n jumps
where n is the number of elements in the list.
Notice how this says up to n jumps because
of course, we are finding the first element,
that's only going to take you one jump.
But if you're finding the last element,
that's going to take you n jumps.
And there is a specific term for this.
When it takes you up to n jumps to find an element
in a structure, this is called, this is what we say,
is that this structure has a complexity of O n.
Okay?
That's just the terminology.
O means complexity of and
inside the brackets we put what the complexity is.
And in this case, the complexity is n, because
we need up to n jumps to find an element.
Okay?
This is called complexity.
So, again, a complexity of O n just means that we
need a number of jumps equal to the number of elements.
Nothing terribly complicated there.
When you're finding an element in a list, you need
to jump n number of times.
That's an O n complexity.
And we're going to look at more into complexity
in the next few videos as well as how we can
sort of reduce that, hopefully.
But of course, instead of n,
you can have other things in there.
For example, O of n squared, means
that you need up to nine jumps
to navigate a collection of three elements.
Three squared is nine.
So this is what O n squared means.
Of course, you can see immediately
that this is going to be slower than O n.
With O n, and you have a list of three elements,
you need to make three jumps.
With O n squared, if you have a list of three elements,
you have to make nine jumps.
And, you can have the opposite,
O of log two n, which means that we need to do
up to three jumps to navigate a collection
of seven elements, for example.
Or indeed, nine elements.
So, the thing inside the brackets is,
you can think of it for now
as the number of jumps in order to reach
the last or the most far away element in a collection.
In a list, the most far away element is the last element.
And, you can need up to n jumps to get there,
if you start at the beginning.
And, there are other structures that are not lists
where these other types of complexity applies.
We're going to look at them throughout the section.
And, don't worry if you're not sure what
for example log two n means.
I encourage you to look it up,
but that is as complicated as it's going to get
in this section.
We're not going to go into complicated maths.
You know, I'm not a big fan of maths.
I'm not very good at it.
So we're not going to get into complicated maths.
Just, log two n is the most complicated we're going to see.
So, don't worry too much if you're not too sure.
It's all going to be fine.
Okay?
Hope you enjoyed this video.
I'll see you on the next one.